the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT open courseware continue
to offer highquality educational
resources for free to make a donation or
to view additional materials from
hundreds of MIT courses visit MIT open
coreware at
ocw.mit.edu
so today we are going to continue
looking at critical points and we'll
learn how to actually decide whether a
critical point is a minimum a maximum or
a SLE point so that's the main topic for
today
so remember
yesterday we looked at critical points
of functions of several
variables and so a critical
point of a functions have two variables
X and
Y that's the point that's a point where
the partial derivatives are both
zero and we've seen that there's various
kinds of critical points there's local
Minima so maybe I should show the
function and its cont plot there's local
Maxima which are
like that and there's points which are
neither Minima nor
Maxima and of course if you have a real
function then it may be it will be more
complicated it will have several
critical
points
so this example here well you see on the
plot that there's two
Maxima and there's in the middle between
them there's a saddle point and actually
you can see them on the Contour plot on
the Contour plot you see the Maxima
because the level curves
become circles that narrow down and
Shrink to the maximum and you can see
the subtle point because here you have
this level curve that makes a figure
eight it crosses itself and if you move
up or down here then so along the y
direction the values of the function
will decrease along the X Direction the
values will
increase so you can see usually quite
easily where are the critical points
just by looking either at the graph or
at the Contour
plot so the only thing with the Contour
plot is you need to read the values to
to tell a minimum from a maximum because
the Contour plots look the same just of
course in one case the values increase
in P One V
decrease
so the question
question is how do we
decide between the various
possibilities so local
minimum local
maximum or settle
point
so and in fact why do we care well the
other question
is how do we
find the global minimum or
maximum of a
function
so here already I should point out
well first of all you know to decide
where the function is the largest in
general you'll have actually to compare
the values for example here if you want
to know what is the maximum of this
function well we have two obvious
candidates we have this local maximum
and that local maximum and the question
is which one is the higher of the two
well in this case actually uh they're
exactly tied for maximum but in general
you would have to compute the function
at both points and compare the values if
you know that it's three at one of them
and four at the other well four
wins the other thing that you see here
is if you're looking for the minimum of
this function well the minimum is not
going to be at any of the critical
points so where's the minimum well it
looks like the minimum is actually out
there on the boundary or at Infinity so
that's another feature the global
minimum or maximum doesn't have to be at
the critical point it could also be
somehow on the side you know in some
limiting situation where one
variable stops being in the allowed
range of values or goes to Infinity so
we have to actually check the boundary
and the infinity behavior of our
function to know where actually the
minimum and maximum will
be so in general should point out this
could
occur
either at a critical
point
or on the
boundary or at
Infinity so by that I mean on the
boundary of the domain of definition
that we are
considering and so we have to try
both okay but so we'll get back to that
for now let's try to focus on the
question of you know what's the type of
the critical
point so we'll use something that's
known as the second derivative
test
and in principle well the idea is kind
of similar to what you do with a
function of one variable namely function
of one variable if the derivative is
zero then you know that you should look
at the second derivative and that will
tell you whether it's curving up or down
whether you have a local Max and a local
mean and the main problem here is of
course we have more possible situations
and we have several derivatives so
actually we have to think a bit harder
about how we'll decide but it will again
involve the second
derivatives okay so let's start with
just an easy example
um that will be useful to us because
actually it will provide the basis for
the general
method okay so we're first going to
consider a case where we have a function
that's actually just quadratic so let's
say I have a function W of XY that's of
the form a x^2 plus BX YY plus c y^
2 Okay so this guy has a critical point
at the origin right because if you take
the derivative with respect to X well
and if you plug xal yals 0 you'll get
zero and same with respect to Y you can
also see if you try to do a linear
approximation of this well all these
guys are much smaller than X and Y when
X and Y are small so the linear
approximation the tangent plane to the
graph is really just W equal
Z okay so how do we do it well
yesterday we actually did an example it
was a bit more complicated than that but
let me do
it so remember we were looking at
something that started with X2 + 2x y
plus + 3 Y squ and there were other
terms but let's forget them now and what
we did is we said well we can rewrite
this as x + y^ 2 + 2 y^ 2 and now this
is a sum of two squares so each of these
guys has to be non- negative and so the
origin will be a
minimum Well turns out we can do
something similar in general no matter
what this values of a B and C are we'll
just try to First Complete things to a
square okay so let's do
that
so in general well let maybe slight less
General and let me assume that a is non
zero because otherwise I can't do what
I'm going to do so I'm going to write
this as a
* X2 plus b/ a x y then I have my C y^ 2
and now this looks like the beginning of
the square of
something okay just like what we did
over
there
so what is it the square of well you
start with X
plus I claim if I put b/ 2 a *
Y and I Square then see the term the
cross term 2 * x * b/ 2 a y will become
b a x
y of course now I I also get some y
squares out of it how many y s do I get
well I get b^ 2 4 a 2 * a so I get B S 4
a y^ 2 so and I want in fact C * y^ 2 so
the number of y s that I should add is C
minus b^2 4
a okay let's see that again if I expand
this thing I will get a x^2 plus a * B /
2 a * 2xy that's going to be my bxy but
I also get b^ 2 4 a^ 2 y^ 2 * a that's
b^2 4 a y^ 2 and that cancels out with
this guy here and then I will be left
with C
y^2 okay do you see it kind of okay if
not well try expanding this Square again
okay maybe I'll do it just to convince
you but so if I expand this I will get a
* let me put that in a different color
because you shouldn't write that down
it's just to convince you again
so if you don't see it yet let's expand
this thing we'll get a * x^ 2 plus a
* 2 x b/ 2 a
y well the 2 A's cancel out we get
bxy plus a * the square of that that's
going to be B ^2 over 4 a
2 y^
2 + C y^ 2 - b over 4 a y^ 2 here the A
and the a simplifies and now these two
terms simplify and give me just C y^2 in
the end okay and that's kind of
unreadable after I've canceled
everything
but if you follow it you see that
basically I've just Rewritten my initial
function okay is
that kind of okay I mean otherwise
there's just no substitute to you know
you have you'll have to do it yourself
I'm
afraid okay so let me continue to play
with
this so I'm just going
to put this in a slightly different
form uh just to clear the
denominators okay so I will instead
write this as one over 4 a
times a big thing so I'm going to just
put 4 a 2
* x + B / 2 a y squared okay so so far I
have the same thing as here okay I just
introduced a 4 a that cancels
out plus for the other
one I'm just clearing the denominator I
end up with 4 a c minus b squ y^
2 Okay so that's a lot of
terms but what does it look like well it
looks like so we have some constant
factors and here we have a square and
here we have a squared a square so
basically we've written this as a sum of
two
squares well a sum or a difference of
two squares and maybe that's what we
need to figure out to know what kind of
point it is because C if you take a sum
of two
squares then you'll know that each
Square takes non- negative value
and you'll have the total you know the
function will always take non- negative
values so the origin will be a
minimum while if you have a difference
of two squares then typically you'll
have a settle point because depending on
whether one or the other is larger
you'll have a positive or A negative
quantity okay so I claim there's various
cases to look
at so let's
see
so in fact I claim there will be three
cases and that's good news for us
because after all we want to distinguish
between three
possibilities so let's first do a away
with the most complicated
one what if 4 a c minus b^2 is
negative well if it's negative then it
means what I have between the brackets
is so the first guy is obviously a
positive
quantity while the second one will be
something negative time y^ 2 so it will
be a negative
quantity okay so one
term is positive
V is
negative that tells us we actually have
a saddle
point
we in fact written our function as a
difference of two
squares okay is that
convincing so if you want I could do
what I could do is actually I could
change my coordinates have new
coordinates called I don't know U equals
um x + b/ 2 a y and V actually well I
could keep Y and then it would look like
a difference of squares
directly okay so that's the first case
the second
case is where 4 a cus b^2 equal
Z well what
happens if that's zero then it means
that this term over goes away so what we
have is just one
square okay so what that means is
actually that our function only on One
Direction of things in the other
direction it's going to actually be
degenerate
so for example forget all the clutter in
there say I give you just the
function two variables W equals just x s
so that means it doesn't depend on Y at
all and if I try to plot the
graph it will look well so X is here so
it will depend on X in that way but it
doesn't depend on Y at all
so what the graph looks like is
something like
that okay
it's basically it's a valy whose bottom
is completely
flat so that means actually we have a
degenerate critical point it's called
degenerate because there's a direction
in which nothing happen and in fact you
have critical points everywhere along
the y
axis okay
so now whether the square that we have
is X or something else namely X plus b/
2 a y it doesn't matter I mean it we'll
still get this degenerate Behavior but
there's a direction in which nothing
happens because we just have the square
of one
quantity
I'm sure that 300 students means 300
different ringtones but I'm not eager to
hear all of them
thanks okay
uh so this
is what's called the degenerate critical
point
and
okay so basically we'll leave it here um
we won't actually try to figure out
further what happens and the reason for
that is that when you have an actual
function a general function not just one
that's quadratic like this then there
will actually be other terms maybe
involving higher Powers you know maybe X
cubed or Y cubed or things like that and
then they will mess up what happens in
this Valley and it's a situation where
we won't be able actually to tell
automatically just by looking at second
derivatives what
happens see for example in a function of
one variable if you have just a function
of one variable say f of xal x 5 well if
you try to decide what type of point the
origin is you know you're going to take
the second derivative it will be zero
and then you can conclude because things
depend on higher order derivatives so we
just won't like that case we just want
to try to figure out what's going on
here now the last situation is a 4 A
minus B2 is
positive
so then that means that actually we've
written things the the big bracket up
there is a sum of two
squares
okay
so that
means that we've written w
as 1 4 a * plus something squ plus
something else
squ okay so these guys have the same
sign and that means that this term here
will always
be greater or equal to
zero and so that means that we should
have either a maximum or a minimum how
do we decide which one it is well we
look at the sign of a exactly okay so
there's two
subcases one is if a is
positive then this quantity over all
will always be non- negative and that
means we have
a a
minimum
okay and if a is negative on the other
hand so that means that we multiply this
positive quantity by a negative number
we get something that's always negative
so zero is actually the
maximum okay is that clear for
everyone
yes said
that uh sorry so yeah I said no I said
in the example wal x it doesn't depend
on y if I have so the more General
situation is W equals some constant well
I guess it's a * x + B / 2 a * y^ 2 so
it does depend on X and on y but it only
depends on this
combination okay so if I choose to move
in somehow a perpendicular Direction in
the direction where this remains
constant
so maybe if I set xal minus b 2 a y then
this remains zero all the time so
there's a degenerate direction in which
I stay at the minimum or maximum or
whatever it is that I have okay so
that's why it's called degenerate
there's a direction in which nothing
happens
okay
yes
yes yeah yeah so that's a very good
question so I say it's going to be the
second derivative test why do we not
have derivatives yet well that's because
I've been looking at this special
example where we have a function like
this and so I don't actually need to
take derivatives yet but that's secretly
that's because a b and c will be the
second derivatives of the function
actually 2 a b and 2 C so now we're
going to go to a general function and
there instead of having these
coefficients a b and c given to us we'll
have to compute them as second
derivatives okay so here I'm basically
setting the stage for what will be the
actual Criterion we'll
use using second derivatives
yes so yes so when you have a degenerate
critical point it could be a degenerate
minimum or a degenerate maximum
depending on the sign of
a but in general once you start having
more complicated functions you don't
really know what will happen anymore it
could also be degenerate saddle and so
on so we won't really be able to
tell uh yes
iter it is possible to have a degenerate
Saddle Point uh for example if I give
you X cubed plus y cubed you can
convince yourself that if you take X and
Y to be negative it will be negative If
X and Y are positive it's positive and
it has a very degenerate critical point
at the origin so that's a degenerate
setle
Point uh we don't see it here because
that doesn't happen if you have only
quadratic terms like that you need to
have higher order terms to see it
happen
Okay
so okay so let's
continue oh before we
continue let's see I wanted to point out
one small thing
so here we have this magic quantity 4 a
c minus b s you've probably seen that
before in your
life yeah it looks like the quadratic
formula except that one involves b
square minus 4 a c but that's really the
same thing okay
so let's see where does the quadratic
formula come in
here well let me write things
differently Okay so we've manipulated
things and gotten to a conclusion but
let me just do a different
manipulation and write this now instead
as y^
2times a * x y^ 2 + b x over y + C okay
see that's the same thing that I had
before right
well so now this quantity here is always
non-
negative what about this
one well of course this one depends on X
over y it means it depends on which
direction you're going to move away from
the origin which ratio between X and Y
you will consider but I claim there's
two situations one
is so let's try to reformulate things so
if the discriminant here is positive
then it means that this has roots right
this has
Solutions and that means that this
quantity can be both positive and
negative this quantity takes positive
and negative
values uh one way to convince yourself
is just to you know
plot  plus BT plus C you know that
there's two Roots so it might look like
this or it might look like that
depending on the sign of
a but in either case it will take values
of both sides so that means that your
function will take values of both
sides
W takes both positive and negative
values and so that means we have a
settle
Point while the other situation when b^
2us 4 a c is negative
means that this equation this quadratic
never takes the value zero so it's
always positive or it's always negative
depending on the sign of a so the other
case is if b - 4 a is
negative
then that quadratic doesn't have a
solution and it could look like this or
like that depending on whether a is
positive or a is
negative so in particular that means a x
y^ 2+ b x over y + C is
always positive
or
always
negative depending on the sign of a and
then that tells us that our function W
will be always positive or always
negative and then we'll get a min or a
maximum okay we'll have a minan or a Max
depending on which situation we are
in okay so that's another way to derive
the same
answer and now here you see why the
discriminant plays a role that's
because it exactly tells you whether
this quadratic quantity has always the
same sign or whether it can actually
cross the value zero when you have a
root of a
quadratic okay so
hopefully at this stage you're happy
with one of the two explanations at
least and now you're willing to believe
I hope that we have basically a way of
deciding what type of critical point we
have in the special case of a quadratic
[Music]
function okay
so now what do we do with a general
function
well so in
general we want to look at second
derivatives okay so now we're getting to
the real
stuff so how many second der do we have
that's maybe the first thing we should
figure out well we can take the
derivative first with respect to X and
then again with respect to
X okay that gives us something we denote
by partial Square F partial x
s or F sub
XX then there's another one which is f
subx Y which means you take the
derivative with respect to X and then
with respect to
Y another thing you can do is do first
derivative respect to Y and then with
respect to X that would be F sub y
x well good news these are actually
always equal to each
other okay so it's a fact that we will
admit uh it's actually not very hard to
check but
so these are always the same we don't
need to worry about which one we do
that's one computation that we won't
need to do we can save bit of effort and
then we have the last one namely the
second partial with respect to Y and
Y F sub y
y okay so we have three of
them
so what does the second derivative test
say it says say that you
have a critical
point x0 y0 of a function of two
variables F and then let's compute the
partial derivatives so let let's call
Capital
a the second derivative with respect to
X let's call capital B the second
derivative with respect to X and
Y and C equals F sub y y at this
point okay so these are just num numbers
because we first compute the second
derivative and then we plug in the
values of X and Y at the critical point
so this will just be
numbers and now what we do is we look at
the
quantity a minus b ^
2 I am not forgetting a four you will
see why very
soon so if AC minus b^ s is
positive then there's two subcases if a
is
positive then it's a local
minimum the second case so still if AC C
minus b^ s is positive but a is
negative then it's going to be a local
maximum and if AC minus b^ 2 is negative
then it's a settle
point and finally if AC minus b^ 2 is
zero then we actually cannot
conclude we don't know
whether it's going to be a minimum a
maximum or a
settle we know it's degenera in some way
but we don't know what type of point it
is okay so that's actually what you need
to remember if you're you know formula
oriented that's all you need to remember
about today but let's try to understand
why you know how this comes out of what
we had
there okay so
I think maybe I actually want to
keep so maybe I want to keep this middle
board because it actually has you know
the recipe that we found before for the
quadratic function so let me move
directly over there and try to relate
our old recipe with a new
one
[Applause]
okay you're easily
amused okay
so so first let's check that this two
things say the same thing in the special
case that we were looking at okay so
let's
verify in the special
case where the function was a x^2 + bxy
plus c y^
so well what
is the second derivative with respect to
X and
X if I take the second derivative with
respect to x and x so first I want to
take maybe the derivative with respect
to X the first let's take first the
first partial W subx that will be 2 a X
plus b
y
right so w sub
XX will be well let's take the partial
respect to X again that's 2
a w sub XY
I take the partial with respect to Y I
will get
B okay now we need also the partial
respect to Y so w sub y is BX + 2 c
y in case you don't believe what I told
you about the mixed partials W sub
YX well you can check and it's again B
so they're indeed the same
thing and w sub y y will be 2
C
so if we now look at these quantities
that tells us
well big a is two little a big b is
Little B Big
C is two little C so AC minus b^ 2 is
what we used to call four little AC
minus B
squ okay
o
so now you can compare the cases well
they're not listed in the same order
just to make it you know harder but uh
so we say it first if so the settle case
is when a c minus b s in big letters is
negative that's the same as 4 A minus
b^2 in lower case is negative
the case where capital A C minus b
square is positive local mean and local
Max corresponds to this one and the case
where we can't conclude was what used to
be the degenerate
one okay so at least we don't seem to
have messed up when copying the formula
now why does that work more generally
than
that well well the answer to that is
again tailor
approximation
uh
okay
so let me just do here quadratic
approximation so quadratic approximation
tells me the following thing it tells me
if I have a function
F of
XY and I want to understand the change
in
F when I change X and Y A little bit
well there's the first order terms there
the linear terms that by now you should
know and be comfortable with that's F
subx times the change in
X then there's F sub y times the change
in
y okay that's the starting point but now
of course if X and Y sorry if we at a
critical point
then that's going to be zero at a
critical
point so that term actually goes
away and that's also zero at the
critical
point so that term also goes away okay
so linear approximation is really no
good we need more terms so what are the
next terms
well the next terms are quadratic terms
and
so I mean if you remember the tailor
formula for a function of a single
variable there was the derivative time x
- x0 plus 12 of the second derivative *
x - x0 2 and see this side here is
really tailor approximation in one
variable looking only at X but of course
we also have terms in involving Y and
terms involving simultaneously X and Y
and these terms are f subx y * changing
x * change in
y plus 12 of FY
y * Yus y0
2 there's no one2 in the middle because
in fact you would have two terms one for
X Y one for YX but they're the
same um and then if you want to continue
there's actually cubic terms involving
the third derivatives and so on but we
are not actually looking at
them and so now when we do this
approximation well the type of critical
point Remains the Same when we replace
the function by this
approximation and so we can apply the
argument that we used to deduce things
in the quadratic case in fact we can it
still works in the general case using
this approximation form
so the general
case
reduces to the quadratic
case and
now you see actually why well here you
see again how this
coefficient which we used to call Little
a is also 1 12 of capital A and same
here this coefficient is what we call
capital b or little B and this
coefficient here is what we called
little C or 12 of capital
c and then when you place things
into the various cases that we had here
you end up with a second derivative
test so what about the what about the
degenerate case why can't we just say
well it's going to be a degenerate
critical
point so the reason is that this
approximation formula is reasonable only
if the higher order terms are
negligible okay so in fact secretly
there's more terms this is only an
approximation there would be terms
involving third derivatives and maybe
even beyond that and so in the non
degenerate case they don't actually
matter because the shape of the function
the shape of the graph is actually
determined by the quadratic terms but in
the degenerate case see if I start with
this and I add something even very very
small along the y axis then that can
that can be enough to bend this valy
slightly up or slightly down and turn my
degenerate Point into either a minimum
or a SLE point and I won't be able to
tell until I go further in the list of
derivatives
so in the degenerate
case what actually
happens depends on the higher order
derivatives
so we need to analyze things more
carefully well we are not going to
bother with that in this class so we'll
just say well we cannot
conclude
okay I mean you have to realize that in
real life you know you have to be
extremely unlucky for this quantity to
end up being exactly
zero well if that happens then what you
should do is maybe try by inspection see
if there's a good reason why the
function should always be positive or
always be negative or
something or you know plot it on a
computer and see what happens
um but otherwise we can't
conclude okay so let's
do
Let's do an
example uh so probably I should leave
this on so
that we still have the test with
us and instead okay so I'll do my
example
here
okay
so just do an
example let's say I look at f of x y = x
+ y + 1 /x Y
where X and Y are positive so I'm
looking only at the first quadrant okay
I mean I'm doing this because I don't
want this denominator to become zero so
I'm just looking at that
situation so let's look first for so the
question will be what are the minimum
and the maximum of this function
so the first thing we should do to hand
to to answer this question is look for
critical points
okay so for that we have to compute the
first
derivatives okay so f subx
is
1 minus
one
over x^2
y okay take the derivative of 1 /x
that's 1/x^2
and we'll want to set that equal to
zero and F sub y is 1 - 1 /x y^ 2 and we
want to set that equal to
zero so what are the equations we have
to solve
well I guess x^2 y =
1 I mean if I get this you know if I
move this guy over here I get 1/ x^2 y =
1 that's X2 y = 1 and x y^2 equals
1 what do you get by comparing these
two well X and Y should both be okay so
yeah I agree with you that one and one
is a solution why is it the only one so
first if I divide this one by that one I
get X over yal 1 so that tells me xals
Y and then if xals y then if I put that
into here it will give me y cubal 1
which tells me yal one and therefore
xals 1 as
well okay
so there's only one
solution there's only one critical
point which is going to be one onea
one okay so
now here's where you do a bit of
work what do you think of that critical
point okay
I see some valid votes I see some okay I
see a lot of people answering for
[Music]
um that seems to suggest that maybe well
you haven't computed the second
derivative yet yes I see someone giving
the correct
answer uh I see some people not giving
quite the correct answer I see more and
more correct answers okay so let's
see to figure out what type of point it
is we should compute the second partial
derivatives okay so f
subxx is
what do we get when we take the
derivative of this with respect to
x 2 over X cubed y
okay so at our point a will be
two f subx
y will
be 1 / x^2 y^
2 so B will be
one and F sub y y is going to be one no
two over X Y
cubed so c will be 2 and so that tells
us well a c minus b^ 2 is 4 -
1 sorry I should probably use a
different Blackboard for
that
a c minus b ^ 2 is 2 * 2 - 1^ 2 is 3 is
positive that tells us we are either a
local minimum or a local
maximum and a is
positive so it's a local
minimum and in fact you can check it's
the global minimum what about the
maximum
well the maximum is not actually at a
critical point it's on the boundary or
at Infinity see so we have actually to
check what happens when X and Y go to
zero or go to Infinity well if that
happens if x or y goes to Infinity then
the function goes to Infinity also if x
or y goes to zero then one/ X Y goes to
Infinity so the
maximum well the function goes to
Infinity when
X goes to infinity or Y goes to infinity
or X and Y go to
zero so it's not at a critical point
okay so in general we have to check both
the critical points and the boundaries
to decide what
happens okay the end have a nice
weekend